README.md, before:


# EX-FastClock

An Adjustable Speed Model Railway Fast Clock which integrates with the DCC-EX Command Station



## Background

This project is based on a project originally written by Jim Gifford (Hallet Cove Southern) in June 2017.  This project used a 32 x 8 LED matrix to display the time and was controlled by a number of pushbuttons.
[See Jim's Original Project here.](https://www.hallettcovesouthern.com/track-plan-design-info/arduino-projects/fast-clock/)

I felt that this project was ripe for an update and decided to convert Jim's code to operate using a cheap TFT/LCD touch screen to run on my own layout. This project is the result.  Much of the code has been rewritten into smaller functions with additional features added, but the time clock calculations are the originals.

This project has now been extended to add the capability of integrating the clock to the DCC-EX 
Command Station and more specifically the EXRAIL automation feature which now allows time based 
control. This feature is optional and can be controlled by the config.h file.

## Hardware

The project uses only two components:
1.  A standard arduino or compatable clone.
2.  A 2.8" MCUFRIEND style TFT-LCD plug-in shield.

The completed project is shown in the accompanying photograph:


![TFT Fast Clock](/images/IMG_2502.jpg)

The FastClock communicates with the Command Station using either I2C or Serial.  

Given that the MCUFREIND style shield is a shield and uses the A4 pin as LCD_RST it is necessary to make a modification to enable the I2C communication.  This involces cutting the A4 pin and soldering a jumper from LCD_RST on the backof the TFT board to the pin that aligns with the UNO RST pin.

![Modified LCD Sheild](/images/IMG_3538.jpg)

This modification allow the A4 & A5 to operate correctly as I2C and was suggested by David Prentice who wrote the MCUFRIEND.kbv library thatthis project uses.  A discussion on this modification can be found [here](https://forum.arduino.cc/t/mcufriend-kbv-library-for-uno-2-4-2-8-3-5-3-6-3-95-inch-mcufriend-shields/353100/100).

If using Serial communication no modification is required. Pins 0 & 1 (TX/RX) are unused on the LCD PCB therefore wires may be soldered to the Arduino PCB to run to Serial connections on the CS.

## Operation

At startup the clock will calculate a start time based on either a) a coded start time (currently 6:00 a.m.) or b) a run time stored in the EEPROM (see item 2) below.

The clock will start in a paused state and will display the speed rate factor (default = x 4).  Once any adjustemts have been made the clock can be started.  The usage of the six buttons are as below:

1. **Start** - Pressing this button will start the clock and the button text will change to **Pause**.  
2. **Save** - Pressing this button will pause the clock and save the current time and Speed Factor to the EEPROM.  These figures will be used to initialise the clock on nextstartup.
3. **Reset** - Pressing this button will pause the clock and set the time to 06:00 with a speed factor of 4.
4. **T+** - Pressing this key will pause the clock and add 15 minutes to the time.
5. **T-** - Pressing this key will pause the clock and deduct 15 minutes from the time.
6. **Rate** - Pressing this key will increase the speed factor to the next level.  The speed factor will cycle around the seven speed settings of 1, 2, 4, 6,, 8, 12 & 30.


## Installation Notes

The project requires three libraries - Adafruit_GFX, Adafruit_Touchscreen and MCUFRIEND_kbv.  All three cn be installed from the Arduino IDE library manager.  Copies of these may be found in the .pio/libdeps/uno folder.

I have also generated two special fonts for the project which can be found in the Fonts folder in the Adafruit GFX Library in this repository.  These should be copied into the fonts folder in the Adafruit_GFX library once installed. The file Arial9pt7b.h congtains a fullset of the Arial Font as used in Windows.  The file Arial48pt7b.h contains a large 48pt Arial font containing only charachters 0-9 and :.  This is used to display the time clock on the screen.  The full font was too large to fit into the Uno memory.

The files within this repository are held in VSCode format.  If using Arduino IDE, copy the files from the src folder to a folder called EX-FastClock within your Arduino folder and rename the EX_FastClock.cpp to EX-FastClock.ino.  The copy the libraries from .pio/libdeps/uno into your libraries folder.


## Configuration Notes

The FastClock can either operate in one of three modes:

* Standalone
* Serial Communication with the CS
* I2C Communication with the CS.

To indicate which mode is in use it is necessary to edit the config.h file.


1. Standalone use.
	The config.h file comes pre-configured to use the clock innstandalone mode.  No changes are necessary.

2. Serial Mode.
	To communicatein Serial mode it is necessary to edit the config.h file and uncomment the following line:

	`#define SEND_VIA_SERIAL true`

	This will load the appropriate code including the Wire library.

3. I2C mode
	To operate in I2C mode edit the config.h file and uncomment the following lines

	`#define I2CAddress 0x55 // default I2C address`
	
	`#define SEND_VIA_I2C true`

	In this mode the CS will poll the FastClock to obtain the time.  It is necessary to set the same I2C address here as used in the myHal.cpp file within the CS.  This is set to a default of 0x55 (decimal 85) but can be set to some other value if this conflicts with othere I2C devices on your setup.


The operating speeds of the clock can be controlled by modifying the following line:

`byte clockSpeeds[] = {1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 30};  //  Fast Clock Speeds`

See the notes in the config.h file.

Finally the default speed of the clock at startup is controlled by the line:

`byte clockSpeed = 4;`

which may be modified as required but must correspond to one of the clockspeeds in the array defined above.

Commit message:

Update font location
move bespoke font files to source code folder and update references.

README.md, after:


# EX-FastClock

An Adjustable Speed Model Railway Fast Clock which integrates with the DCC-EX Command Station



## Background

This project is based on a project originally written by Jim Gifford (Hallet Cove Southern) in June 2017.  This project used a 32 x 8 LED matrix to display the time and was controlled by a number of pushbuttons.
[See Jim's Original Project here.](https://www.hallettcovesouthern.com/track-plan-design-info/arduino-projects/fast-clock/)

I felt that this project was ripe for an update and decided to convert Jim's code to operate using a cheap TFT/LCD touch screen to run on my own layout. This project is the result.  Much of the code has been rewritten into smaller functions with additional features added, but the time clock calculations are the originals.

This project has now been extended to add the capability of integrating the clock to the DCC-EX 
Command Station and more specifically the EXRAIL automation feature which now allows time based 
control. This feature is optional and can be controlled by the config.h file.

## Hardware

The project uses only two components:
1.  A standard arduino or compatable clone.
2.  A 2.8" MCUFRIEND style TFT-LCD plug-in shield.

The completed project is shown in the accompanying photograph:


![TFT Fast Clock](/images/IMG_2502.jpg)

The FastClock communicates with the Command Station using either I2C or Serial.  

Given that the MCUFREIND style shield is a shield and uses the A4 pin as LCD_RST it is necessary to make a modification to enable the I2C communication.  This involces cutting the A4 pin and soldering a jumper from LCD_RST on the backof the TFT board to the pin that aligns with the UNO RST pin.

![Modified LCD Sheild](/images/IMG_3538.jpg)

This modification allow the A4 & A5 to operate correctly as I2C and was suggested by David Prentice who wrote the MCUFRIEND.kbv library thatthis project uses.  A discussion on this modification can be found [here](https://forum.arduino.cc/t/mcufriend-kbv-library-for-uno-2-4-2-8-3-5-3-6-3-95-inch-mcufriend-shields/353100/100).

If using Serial communication no modification is required. Pins 0 & 1 (TX/RX) are unused on the LCD PCB therefore wires may be soldered to the Arduino PCB to run to Serial connections on the CS.

## Operation

At startup the clock will calculate a start time based on either a) a coded start time (currently 6:00 a.m.) or b) a run time stored in the EEPROM (see item 2) below.

The clock will start in a paused state and will display the speed rate factor (default = x 4).  Once any adjustemts have been made the clock can be started.  The usage of the six buttons are as below:

1. **Start** - Pressing this button will start the clock and the button text will change to **Pause**.  
2. **Save** - Pressing this button will pause the clock and save the current time and Speed Factor to the EEPROM.  These figures will be used to initialise the clock on nextstartup.
3. **Reset** - Pressing this button will pause the clock and set the time to 06:00 with a speed factor of 4.
4. **T+** - Pressing this key will pause the clock and add 15 minutes to the time.
5. **T-** - Pressing this key will pause the clock and deduct 15 minutes from the time.
6. **Rate** - Pressing this key will increase the speed factor to the next level.  The speed factor will cycle around the seven speed settings of 1, 2, 4, 6,, 8, 12 & 30.


## Installation Notes

The easiest way to download this version of the software from the Github Repository is as follows:
	Navigate to the Arduino IDE Branch
	Click on the green CODE button
	Select the Download ZIP option

Once the file has downloaded, select the file in Windows Explorer to see the list of files.

Create a folder within your Arduino sletches folder called EX-Fast_Clock.  Copy the files from the root folder to a folder called EX-Fast_Clock folder just created.  

The project requires three libraries - Adafruit_GFX, Adafruit_Touchscreen and MCUFRIEND_kbv.  All three cn be installed from the Arduino IDE library manager.  However copies of the libraries used in this project can be found in the Libraries within the zip file. These folder should be copied into your normal libraries folder within the Arduino folder.

I have also generated two special fonts for the project which can be found in the main folder in this repository.  The file Arial9pt7b.h congtains a fullset of the Arial Font as used in Windows.  The file Arial48pt7b.h contains a large 48pt Arial font containing only characters 0-9 and :.  This is used to display the time clock on the screen.  The full font was too large to fit into the Uno memory.




## Configuration Notes

The FastClock can either operate in one of three modes:

* Standalone
* Serial Communication with the CS
* I2C Communication with the CS.

To indicate which mode is in use it is necessary to edit the config.h file.


1. Standalone use.
	The config.h file comes pre-configured to use the clock in standalone mode.  No changes are necessary.

2. Serial Mode.
	To communicatein Serial mode it is necessary to edit the config.h file and uncomment the following line:

	`#define SEND_VIA_SERIAL true`

	This will load the appropriate code including the Wire library.

3. I2C mode
	To operate in I2C mode edit the config.h file and uncomment the following lines

	`#define I2CAddress 0x55 // default I2C address`
	
	`#define SEND_VIA_I2C true`

	In this mode the CS will poll the FastClock to obtain the time.  It is necessary to set the same I2C address here as used in the myHal.cpp file within the CS.  This is set to a default of 0x55 (decimal 85) but can be set to some other value if this conflicts with othere I2C devices on your setup.


The operating speeds of the clock can be controlled by modifying the following line:

`byte clockSpeeds[] = {1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 30};  //  Fast Clock Speeds`

See the notes in the config.h file.

Finally the default speed of the clock at startup is controlled by the line:

`byte clockSpeed = 4;`

which may be modified as required but must correspond to one of the clockspeeds in the array defined above.
